---
layout: post
title: Source Control - GIT
tags: [article, source-control]
---

Introduction:
 - Git Different Articles

<!--more-->

## Git from the inside out

[Git from the inside out](https://codewords.recurse.com/issues/two/git-from-the-inside-out)
This essay explains how Git works. It assumes you understand Git well enough to use it to version control your projects.

The essay focuses on the graph structure that underpins Git and the way the properties of this graph dictate Git’s behavior. Looking at fundamentals, you build your mental model on the truth rather than on hypotheses constructed from evidence gathered while experimenting with the API. This truer model gives you a better understanding of what Git has done, what it is doing, and what it will do.

The text is structured as a series of Git commands run on a single project. At intervals, there are observations about the graph data structure that Git is built on. These observations illustrate a property of the graph and the behavior that this property produces.

---

## A Visual Guide to Version Control
[A Visual Guide to Version Control](https://betterexplained.com/articles/a-visual-guide-to-version-control/)

Version Control (aka Revision Control aka Source Control) lets you track your files over time. Why do you care? So when you mess up you can easily get back to a previous working version.

##  Intro to Distributed Version Control (Illustrated)
[Intro to Distributed Version Control (Illustrated)](https://betterexplained.com/articles/intro-to-distributed-version-control-illustrated/)

Traditional version control helps you backup, track and synchronize files. Distributed version control makes it easy to share changes. Done right, you can get the best of both worlds: simple merging and centralized releases.

## Aha! Moments When Learning Git
[https://betterexplained.com/articles/aha-moments-when-learning-git/](Aha! Moments When Learning Git)

There's A Staging Area!
Git has a staging area. Git has a staging area!!!

Yowza, did this ever confuse me. There's both a repo ("object database") and a staging area (called "index"). Checkins have two steps:

- git add foo.txt
    - Add foo.txt to the index. It's not checked in yet!
- git commit -m "message"
    - Put staged files in the repo; they're now tracked
    - You can "git add --update" to stage all tracked, modified files

**Why stage?** Git's flexible: if a, b and c are changed, you can commit them separately or together.